Add Approaches for Collatz Conjecture (#1143)
exercism/haskell: exercises/practice/collatz-conjecture/.approaches/worker-wrapper/content.md

# Worker&ndash;wrapper

```haskell
collatz :: Integer -> Maybe Integer
collatz n
  | n > 0 = Just (go 0 n)
  | otherwise = Nothing
  where
    go !acc 1 = acc
    go !acc k = go (acc + 1) (if even k then k `div` 2 else 3 * k + 1)
```

This approach uses an inner _worker_ function to simultaneously calculate successive steps and keep track of the number of steps already taken.
It also uses a _bang pattern_ to force intermediate evaluation, to guarantee decent space efficiency.

## The worker&ndash;wrapper construct

Sometimes, when solving a problem, it is more convenient or efficient to keep track of some kind of _state_.
Many other languages use local variables for this.
However, variables do not exist in Haskell: all bindings are constants.

In lieu of local variables we can add extra parameters to our functions.
These will hold our state.
'Changing' of the state is done by calling the same functions with different arguments.

> Functions that uses such additional parameters to represent state are often called _workers_, and functions that use them are often called _wrappers_.

Author: ```suggestion
Functions that uses such additional parameters to represent state are often called _workers_, and functions that use workers to solve a problem in a stateful way are often called _wrappers_.
```

It might evaluate as follows.

```haskell
_ =  length' 0 "abcde"
  == length' 1 "bcde"
  == length' 2 "cde"
  == length' 3 "de"
  == length' 4 "e"
  == length' 5 ""
  == 5
```

The computation stays small at every step &ndash; much more efficient!

To obtain an efficient function `length` with the familiar `[a] -> Int` type &ndash; instead of the more involved `Int -> [a] -> Int` &ndash; we can 'wrap' `length'` in a function that provides it with initial arguments:

```haskell
length :: [a] -> Int
length xs = length' 0 xs
  where
    length' count []     = count
    length' count (_:xs) = length' (1 + count) xs
```

Here `length` is known as the _wrapper_, and `length'` as the _worker_.
Hence, this is an example of the _worker&ndash;wrapper_ construct.

The worker is commonly called `go`, `loop`, or `f'` when the wrapper is called `f`.

The worker&ndash;wrapper pattern is more general than demonstrated here.
For a few more more examples, see the [relevant wiki article][wiki-worker-wrapper], and for yet more examples and an explanation of the general pattern see the paper «[The worker/wrapper transformation][paper-worker-wrapper]» (pdf).

## Bang patterns

> The above implementation of `length'` _might_ evaluate as efficiently as illustrated.
> However, it also might not!
> The definition of `length'` allows evaluation to proceed as follows as well.

Author: ```suggestion
The above implementation of `length'` _might_ evaluate as efficiently as illustrated.
However, depending on which optimization opportunities are spotted by the compiler, it also might not!
The definition of `length'` allows evaluation to proceed as follows as well.
```

```haskell
_ =  length' 0 "abcde"
  == length' (1 + 0) "bcde"
  == length' (1 + (1 + 0)) "cde"
  == length' (1 + (1 + (1 + 0))) "de"
  == length' (1 + (1 + (1 + (1 + 0)))) "e"
  == length' (1 + (1 + (1 + (1 + (1 + 0))))) ""
  == 1 + (1 + (1 + (1 + (1 + 0))))
  == 1 + (1 + (1 + (1 + 1)))
  == 1 + (1 + (1 + 2))
  == 1 + (1 + 3)
  == 1 + 4
  == 5
```

Still a computation as large as the list was long is built.
The situation is not quite as bad as before though.

In the case of the naive implementation of `length`, the built up expression has the form

```haskell
_ = 1 + (1 + (⋯(1 + length xs)⋯))
```

> This expression cannot be simplified before `length xs` has been evaluated.

Author: ~~~suggestion
In the case of the naive implementation of `length`, the built up expression has the form

```haskell
_ = 1 + (1 + (⋯(1 + length …)⋯))
```

This expression cannot be simplified before `length …` has been evaluated.
~~~
